and we're joined Now by Maron Jones
associate professor of Middle East
studies at hammad bin Khalifa University
very good to see you firstly how
significant would you say these comments
by Chuck Schumer are I've heard one
former Middle East peace Envoy us Middle
East peace Envoy call them a political
earthquake they are and I think we need
to look in the context of American
politics some people might say it's soft
but look at it this way Chuck Schumer at
the end of the day is the he's described
as the highest ranking Jewish official
elect official in the US and he has said
something essentially a really scathing
condemnation of Netanyahu during a time
where the US you know support for Israel
is slowly eroding this is really
important unprecedented and what makes
it really significant is that Schumer
has been a longtime Ally of Israel right
in the past few months he's even
considering write a book on
anti-Semitism because he's concerned
about the way liberal youth in America
are viewing Israel so to have him come
and say this I would say is massively
significant and does it show a rift in
the Democratic party would you say
between those who want to give Israel
cart blanch and the more progressives
well I don't think the rift is that uh
clearcut I think traditionally with a
rift you'd see people saying no no um we
want to support Israel we oppose what
you're saying but actually I think the
rift is more so that there are people
now in the Democratic party who really
support more drastic action against
Israel such as the withdrawing of us Aid
to those who are slightly more moderate
in their desire to critic criticize it I
think the fact that Schumer is saying
this is actually indicative not
necessarily of a split but actually as a
moving towards a general condemnation of
Israel's genocide in Gaza so I think
there is a split but it's not completely
bifurcated it's more subtle yeah and
isn't it interesting that he actually
said that the US should be using more
leverage using the leverage it has with
Israel do you think that that was
hinting at conditioning the billions of
dollars they give to Israel absolutely I
think it's a euphemism for conditioning
and I think what we're seeing now
progressively from Kamala Us's
condemnation to now Schumer's
condemnation uh and especially his
mention as you said of Leverage I think
this is basically suggesting that um Aid
may be conditional and this is sort of
basically the last warning Netanyahu is
getting from the US or at least one of
the last warnings he's getting to sort
of say we need something and Biden as
you mention as was mentioned in the
report has again they announced these
sanctions on settlements so they're
clearly doing things in addition to this
rhetoric to suggest that they're willing
to take action whether whether we far
away from them actually conditioning Aid
I think we're quite far from that point
but I think until there's actually a
better uh delivery of Aid in Gaza we are
going to continue to see the upping of
this rhetoric and when we look at the
later sanctions again the against these
um outposts and settlers that the Biden
Administration announced on Thursday
settlements are illegal under
international law so why Target just a
few individuals well I I think yeah this
is absolutely right I mean let's let's
not forget that the settlements have
always been illegal under international
law so but if you target them all at the
same time then really you lose that
leverage right so I think what they're
trying to do is say hey we're doing a
few we're going to see if you come to
the table or actually sort of comply
with what we're demanding of you netan
yaho first if not we'll take this a few
steps further so I think again if we
don't see any movement on Aid going into
Gaza what we're going to see is maybe uh
sanctions on more supplements so they're
using it to give nanahu a longer
essentially a bit of room to actually
come to the table okay and just lastly
going back to the point about
conditioning Aid because this is
something that's been spoken about a lot
since the war on Gaza began especially
military aid you know American weapons
that are being used and the killing of
Palestinians in Gaza you don't think
that that will happen many people think
don't think that that will happen but
just the fact that bringing it you know
to the US House of Representatives or to
the Senate that will delay that will
delay it wed yeah I mean it's it's it's
absolutely kind of um putting this on
the table but I think we still have to
ackn at this point that the US is
talking about and sending Aid to Gaza
well at the same time sending military
aid to Israel to kill gazans right but I
do think this is significant and I think
Netanyahu crucially will know that the
possibility of having us Aid withdrawn
is on the table now right because we are
seeing a stry escalation so I think it
is significant and I think it's
something that we need to or Israel need
to be very concerned about MCO and Jones
thank you as always for your analysis we
appreciate it